Few common architectures for Game Loop
# Windows Message Pumps
On Windows, games need to service messages from Windows in addiction to servicing engine subsystems.
Windows games contain *message pump.*
```
while(true)
{
	MSG msg;
	while(PeekMessage(&msg, nullptr, 0, 0) > 0)
	{
		TranslateMessage(&msg);
		DispatchMessage(&msg);
	}
	RunOneIterationOfGameLoop();
}
```
Drawback of this implementation is game will freeze whenever you resize or drag game's window around.
# Callback-Driven Frameworks
Most game engine subsystems and third-party game middleware packages are structured as libraries.
It provides maximum flexibility, but is sometimes difficult to use - programmer must know how to use functions and classes.
Other way is to provide game engine or game middleware as framework. Framework is partially constructed application. The rest should be provided by programmer with custom implementations of missing functionalities. Drawback is programmer has no control over the flow of control within application.
OGRE works as library wrapped in framework. At the lowest level, OGRE provides functions that can be called directly by a game engine programmer. However, OGRE also provides a framework that encapsulates knowledge of how to use the low-level OGRE library effectively.
```
while(true)
{
	for(each frameListener)
	{
		frameListener.frameStarted();
	}
	renderCurrentScene();
	for(each frameListener)
	{
		frameListener.frameEnded();
	}
	finalizeSceneAndSwapBuffers();
}
```
example of FrameListener
```
class GameFrameListener : public Ogre::FrameListener
{
public:
	virtual void frameStarted(const FrameEvent & event)
	{
		pollJoypad(event); 
		updatePlayerControls(event);
		updateDynamicsSimulation(event);
		resolveCollisions(event); 
		updateCamera(event);
	}
	virtual void frameEnded(const FrameEvent & event)
	{
		drawHud(event);
	}
}
```
### Event-Based Updating
*Event* is any interesting change in state of the game or its environment.
Most engines have *event system* which permits various subsystems to register interest in kinds of events and to respond to those events when they occur.
Some game engines leverage event system in order to implement periodic servicing of some or all of their subsystems.
For this to work, the event system must permit events to be posted into the future—that is, to be queued for later delivery.
