How are timelines and clocks implemented in real game engines!
### Frame rate and time deltas
*Frame rate* describes how rapidly sequence of still 3D frames is presented to viewer. Unit of Hertz (Hz) - number of cycles per second - can be used to describe the rate of any periodic process. In games and film, frame rate is usually measured in FPS - *frames per second,* which is same as Hz for all intents and purposes.  
The amount of time which passes between frames is called *time delta* or *delta time*.  (At 60 FPS, delta time is 1/60 of a second ~ 16.6ms).
Milliseconds are common unit for measurement in games.
### From Frame Rate to Speed
If we want to move object 40 meters per second, we can multiply speed v(measured in meters per second) with ∆t.
This is simple form of *numerical integration* known as *explicit Euler method.*
It works well as long as the speeds of objects are constant.
Central problem in game programming is to determine value of ∆t.
##### Old-School CPU Dependent Games
The old school approach was to ignore ∆t.
**This produces cpu dependent code. Faster the cpu, faster the objects in the game.**
##### Updating based on elapsed time
The technique is to remember CPU high frequency clock at the beginning and at the end of frame and subtract those values, producing ∆t and passing it later to every subsystem which needs it.
There is one big problem with this technique. We are using measured value ∆t of k frame and using it in k+1 frame.
**Past performance is not guarantee of future results.**
Something might happen next frame that causes it to take much more time (or much less) than the current frame. We call such an event a *frame-rate spike*.
> E.G Let’s assume that our physics simulation is most stable when updated once every 33.3 ms (i.e., at 30 Hz). If we get one bad frame, taking say 57 ms, then we might make the mistake of stepping the physics system twice on the next frame, presumably to “cover” the 57 ms that has passed.
##### Using a running average
If the camera is pointed down a hallway containing lots of expensive-to-draw objects on one frame, there’s a good chance it will still be pointed down that hallway on the next. 
Reasonable approach is to average the frame-time measurements over a small number of frames and use that as the next frame’s estimate of ∆t. This allows the game to adapt to a varying frame rate, while softening the effects of momentary performance spikes. The longer the averaging interval, the less responsive the game will be to a varying frame rate, but spikes will have less of an impact as well.
##### Governing the Frame Rate
*Governing frame rate* works as follow:
- try to guarantee that every frame is 33.3ms (30fps) or 16.6ms(60fps)
- if frame executes faster, put main thread to sleep
- if frame is slower, wait for next frame
**During development, you can leave the engine in “variable frame rate” mode, and everything will work as expected. Later on, when the game is getting closer to achieving its target frame rate consistently, we can switch on frame-rate governing and start to reap its benefits**
Pros of consistent frame rate:
- some subsystems works the best while updating with constant rate
- constant frame rate helps avoid  *tearing*
- when elapsed time is consistent, *record and playback* becomes more reliable
==To implement record and playback, we make note of every relevant event that occurs during gameplay, saving each one in a list along with an accurate time stamp. The list of events can then be replayed with exactly the same timing, using the same initial conditions and an identical initial random seed. In theory, doing this should produce a gameplay experience that is indistinguishable from the original playthrough. However, if the frame rate isn’t consistent, things may not happen in exactly the same order. This can cause “drift,” and pretty soon your AI characters are flanking when they should have fallen back==
##### Screen Tearing and V-Sync
*Screen tearing* occurs when the back buffer is swapped when front buffer has been only partially drawn. To avoid tearing, rendering engines wait for the *vertival blanking interval* before swapping buffers.
Waiting for v-blank interval is *v-sync*. It is when "electron gun" is turned off on display.
It effectively clamps the frame rate of the main game loop to a multiple of the screen's refresh rate.
### Measuring Real Time with a High-Resolution Timer.
All modern CPUs provide *high-resolution timer*.
This timer should be used for time calculations in game. 
Different microprocessors and operating systems provide different ways to query the high-resolution timer.
High-resolution register is usually 64bits.
##### High-Resolution clock drifts.
On some multicore processors, the high-resolution timers are independent on each core, and they can (and do) drift apart. If you try to compare absolute timer readings taken on different cores to one another, you might end up with some strange results—even negative time deltas.
### Time units and clock variables
1. What *time units* should we use? Do we want to store times in seconds, milliseconds or machine cycles? Other units?
2. What *data type* should be used to store time measurements? 64-bit integer, 32-bit integer or 32-bit floating point variable?
How much precision do we need? And what range of magnitudes do we expect to be able to represent?
##### 64-bit integer clocks
This is the most flexible time representation, presuming you can afford 64 bits worth of storage.
##### 32-bit integer clocks
When measuring relatively short duration with high precision, we can turn to a 32-bit integer clock, measured in machine cycles. To profile the performance of a block of code, we might do something like this:
```
u64 beginTicks = readHiResTimer();
//here code to profile
u64 endTicks = readHiResTimer();
u32 dtTicks = static_cast<u32>(endTicks - beginTicks);
```
##### 32-bit floating point clocks
Another common approach is to store relatively small time deltas in floatingpoint format, measured in units of seconds. To do this, we simply multiply a duration measured in CPU cycles by the CPU’s clock frequency, which is in cycles per second.
```
float dtSeconds = 1.f/30.f //assuming 30fps
u64 beginTicks = readHiResTimer();
while(true)
{
	runOneIterationOfGameLoop(dtSeconds);
	u64 endTicks = readHiResTimer();
	dtSeconds = (float)(endTicks - beginTicks) / (float)getHiResTimerFrequency();
	beginTicks = endTicks;
}
```
Important `endTicks - beginTicks` subtraction is needed before conversion to `float`.
##### Limitations of floating-point clocks
We must be cautious when storing long durations in a floating-point clock variable. If we keep track of the amount of time that has elapsed since the game was started, a floating-point clock will eventually become inaccurate to the point of being unusable.
Floating-point clocks are usually only used to store relatively short time deltas, measuring at most a few minutes and more often just a single frame or less. If an absolute-valued floating-point clock is used in a game, you will need to reset the clock to zero periodically to avoid accumulation of large magnitudes.
##### Other Time Units
Some game engines allow timing values to be specified in a game-defined unit that is fine-grained enough to permit an integer format to be used (as opposed to requiring a floating-point format), precise enough to be useful for a wide range of applications within the engine, and yet large enough that a 32-bit clock won’t wrap too often. One common choice is a 1/300 second time unit.
This works because:
- it is fine-grained enough for many purposes
- it wraps once every 165.7 days
- it is even multiple of both NTSC and PAL refresh rates
60 FPS is 5 units in such duration.
Obviously a 1/300 second time unit is not precise enough to handle subtle effects, like time-scaling an animation. (If we tried to slow a 30 FPS animation down to less than 1/10 of its regular speed, we’d be out of precision!)
### Dealing with breakpoints
A simple approach can be used to get around this problem. In the main game loop, if we ever measure a frame time in excess of some predefined upper limit (e.g., 1 second), we can assume that we have just resumed execution after a breakpoint, and we set the delta-time artificially to 1/30 or 1/60 of a second (or whatever the target frame rate is). In effect, the game becomes frame-locked for one frame, in order to avoid a massive spike in the measured frame duration.
```
//start off assuming ideal dt
float dt = 1.f/30.f;
u64 beginTicks = readHiResTimer();
while(true) //main game loop
{
	updateSubsystemA(dt);
	updateSubsystemB(dt);
	renderScene();
	swapBuffers();
	u64 endTicks = readHiResTimer();
	dt = (float)(endTicks - beginTicks) / (float)getHiResTimerFrequency();
	if(dt > 1.f)
	{
		dt = 1.f/30.f;
	}
	beginTicks = endTicks;
}
```