Game engine end up having a large number of configurable options. 
## Loading and saving options
Configurable options are not particularly useful unless their values can be configured, stored on a hard disk, memory card or other storage medium, and later retrieved by the game.
- Text configuration files - most common way to store configuration parameters. Format is not important, popular are INI files (OGRE renderer uses it with key-value pairs grouped into logical sections). Another ones are JSON or XML.
- Compressed binary files - format of choice on a memory card, because storage space on these cards is often limited (e.g. SNES).
- The Windows registry - stored as a tree, where the interior nodes act like file folders, and the leaf nodes store the individual options as key-value pairs. **Using the Windows registry for storing engine configuration information. The registry is a monolithic database that can easily be corrupted, lost or throw out of sync.**
- Command-line options - engine might provide a mechanism for controlling any option in the game via the command line, or it might expose only a small subset of the game’s options here.
- Environment variables - sometimes used to store configuration options as well.
- Online user profiles - server and internet connection needed
## Per-User Options
It is important to **usually differ between global options and per-user options.** Per user options allow programmers, designers, artists and players to configure the game or game engine to his or her liking. 
Care must be taken to store users options in such a way that player sees only his/her options. In a console game, it is typically done by saving progress along with per-user options in slots on a memory card or disk. These slots are **implemented as files.**.
On Windows, hidden folder *AppData* is used to store information about per-user config. Sometimes games and applications store options in registry as well.
## Configuration Management in some Real Engines
Brief look of examples how to manage configuration.
### Example: Quake's Cvars
The Quake engines uses a configuration management system known as console variables, or cvars for short. A cvar is a floating-point or string global variable whose value can be inspected and modified from within Quake’s in-game console. At runtime, cvars are stored in a global linked list. Each cvar is a dynamically allocated instance of struct cvar_t, which contains the variable’s name, its value as a string or float, a set of flag bits, and a pointer to the next cvar in the linked list of all cvars. Cvars are accessed by calling Cvar_Get(), which creates the variable if it doesn’t already exist and modified by calling Cvar_Set(). One of the bit flags, CVAR_ARCHIVE, controls whether or not the cvar will be saved into a configuration file called config.cfg. If this flag is set, the value of the cvar will persist across multiple runs of the game.
### Example: OGRE
OGRE uses collection of files in Windows INI format for its configuration. By default, three files are used.
- plugins.cfg - controls which optional engine plug-ins are enabled and where to find them on the disk
- resources.cfg - contains a search path specifying where game assets can be found
- ogre.cfg - contains set of options for which renderer to use, preferred video mode, screen size etc.
the OGRE source code is freely available, so it would be quite easy to change it to search for its configuration files in the user’s home directory instead of in the folder containing the executable. The Ogre::ConfigFile class makes it easy to write code that reads and writes brand new configuration files as well.
### Example: The Uncharted and The Last of Us series
Naughty Dog's engine makes use of a number of configuration mechanisms.
#### In-Game Menu Settings
Engine supports powerful in-game menu system, allowing devs to control global configuration options and invoke commands. Data types of those options must be simple (bools, int, floats).
Each configuration option is implemented as a global variable, or member of a singleton struct or class. When the menu option that controls an option is created, variable address is provided. Menu option then directly controls it.
Following function creates submenu item containing some options for *rail vehicles*.
(simple vehicles which ride on splines).
It defines menu items controlling three global variables: two Booleans and one floating-point value. The items are collected onto a menu, and a special item is returned that will bring up the menu when selected. Presumably the code calling this function adds this item to the parent menu that it is building.
```
DMENU::ItemSubmenu * CreateRailVehicleMenu()
{
	extern bool g_railVehicleDebugDraw2D;
	extern bool g_railVehicleDebugDrawCameraGoals;
	extern float g_railVehicleFlameProbability;
	DMENU::Menu * pMenu = new DMENU::Menu("RailVehicle");
	pMenu->PushBackItem(
		new DMENU::ItemBool("Draw 2D Spring Graphs",
			DMENU::ToggleBool,
			&g_railVehicleDebugDraw2D);
	pMenu->PushBackItem(
		new DMENU::ItemBool("Draw Goals (Untracked)",
			DMENU::ToggleBool,
			&g_railVehicleDebugDrawCameraGoals);
	DMENU::ItemFloat * pItemFloat; 
	pItemFloat = new DMENU::ItemFloat( "FlameProbability",
					DMENU::EditFloat, 5, "%5.2f",
					&g_railVehicleFlameProbability);
	)
	pItemFloat->SetRangeAndStep(0.f, 1.f, 0.1f, 0.01f);
	DMENU::ItemSubmenu * pSubmenuItem;
	pSubmenuItem = new DMENU::ItemSubmenu("RailVehicle...", pMenu);
	return pSubmenuItem;
}
```
Any option can be saved by marking it with the circle on PlayStation controller. The menu settings are saved in an INI-style text file. If a programmer changes a default, all users will see new default, unless of course user has saved custom value.
#### Command Line Arguments
The Naughty Dog engine scans the command line for a predefined set of special options. The name of the level to load can be specified, along with a number of other commonly used arguments.
#### Scheme Data Definitions
The vast majority of engine and game configuration in the Naughty Dog engine is specified using language called *Scheme*. Compiling file in *Scheme* transforms data structures into binary files that can be load into engine. For each data structure, compiler produces C struct declaration as well. These header files allow the engine to properly interpret the data contained in the loaded binary files. The binary files can even be recompiled and reloaded on the fly, allowing developers to alter the data in Scheme and see the effects of their changes immediately (as long as data members are not added or removed, as that would require a recompile of the engine).
The following example illustrates the creation of a data structure specifying the properties of an animation. It then exports three unique animations to the game.
`simple-animation.scm`
```
;; Define a new data type called simple-animation
(deftype simple-animation ()
	(
		(name string)
		(speed float :default 1.0)
		(fade-in-seconds float :default 0.25) 
		(fade-out-seconds float :default 0.25)
	)
)
;; Now define three instances of this data structure
(define-export anim-walk
	(new simple-animation
		:name "walk" 
		:speed 1.0 
	) 
) 
(define-export anim-walk-fast 
	(new simple-animation 
		:name "walk" 
		:speed 2.0 
	) 
) 
(define-export anim-jump 
	(new simple-animation 
		:name "jump" 
		:fade-in-seconds 0.1 
		:fade-out-seconds 0.1 
	) 
)
```
This Scheme code would generate the following C/C++ header file:
`simple-animation.h`
```
struct SimpleAnimation
{
	const char * m_name;
	float m_speed;
	float m_fadeInSeconds;
	float m_fadeOutSeconds;
};
```
In game, this data can be read by calling the `LookupSymbol()` function.
```
#include "simple-animation.h"
void someFuntion()
{
	SimpleAnimtion* pWalkAnim = LookupSymbol<SimpleAnimation*>(SID("anim-walk"));
}
```
This system gives the programmers a great deal of flexibility in defining all sorts of configuration data—from simple Boolean, floating-point and string options all the way to complex, nested, interconnected data structures. It is used to specify detailed animation trees, physics parameters, player mechanics and so on.